Introduction
By now, you probably have a strong grasp of the important foundational concepts of CSS, but there is a lot more that you can do with CSS to make some truly spectacular looking websites. It’s time to cover those useful little CSS features you can use to add some shine to your projects.

There are a lot of CSS properties. Luckily, you don’t have to memorize them all: the amount of properties you’re actually going to use on a daily basis is much smaller. This lesson is going to cover most of the items you’ll end up using on a regular basis. The format of this lesson is a little different since it’s essentially just a list of CSS properties. We’ll give a little description of the property and then link you to some documentation where you can see all the available options.

Lesson overview
This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

You’ll learn about a lot of useful CSS properties!

The background property is actually a shorthand for 8 different background-related properties, all of which you can read about in the linked docs. Beyond changing background-colors, you can also specify background images, change the position and size of background images, and change how background images repeat or tile if they are too small to fill their container. It is also possible to have multiple background layers.

Borders
At this point, you’ve probably already encountered border and border-radius. The border property is another shorthand, but it is much less complicated than the background shorthand. For borders, basically you just need to define a size, style and color.

border-radius is the property that is used to create rounded corners on things. As you’ll see in the docs, it’s possible to get fancy and define different radii for each corner of an element, but this is rarely useful. Store that information in the category of “things I’ll look up if I ever need it”.

Read the MDN docs for border and border-

box-shadow
As you might expect from the property name, box-shadow adds a shadow effect around an element. This is useful to create a sense of depth on your page and to add subtle separation between elements.

In usage it’s straightforward, but keep in mind that it’s best used sparingly, and subtly. Prefer lighter, barely visible shadows to darker or brighter colors.

Read the box-shadow docs.

Overflow
It is possible, using overflow, to define what happens to an element when its content is too big to fit. The most common usage is likely to add scrollbars to an element inside a webpage, for example a card style element with scrollable content.

Check out the overflow docs.

Opacity
Opacity is another easy one that can be very useful in some circumstances.

Check out opacity for a definition and some examples.

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border-radius